Fixes in type conversion rules (#144)
Materials-Consortia/OPTiMaDe: optimade.md

the database provider decides their types. In the syntactic
constructs that can accommodate values of more than one type, 
the semantics of the comparisons are controlled by the
types of the participating properties. The following conventions apply
for comparisons of values of different types:

* Given an integer property and a numeric or string token, the value of

> the latter MUST be converted to an integer using conventions of stdlib's

Author: I agree that the wording sounds imperative, but `MUST` sounds so is the whole specification (e.g. "the client MUST NOT assume levels beyond the minor version are supported" and so on). While it might be nice to adjust the language of the specification, this will introduce some text bloat as well as make certain sentences difficult to read. If needed, I'd vote to do the language adjustments in a separate PR.

> the latter MUST be converted to an integer using conventions of stdlib's

Reviewer: Ah, I don't think I explained my line of thinking clearly enough. It is a rather minor point, but I feel a need to clarify. Apologies for the length, though.

My issue isn't with the generally imperative sounding nature of MUST. It is that the statement reads as a demand that when the conditions trigger (e.g., comparison of integer property and a string token) an actual conversion MUST execute by running `atoi` or equivalent. This is a statement about how filters are to be implemented, not how they are interpreted.

Section 5 is about the filtering language. The filter language is a domain-specific language expressing comparisons to filter out specific entries from larger sets. Filter strings have a "meaning" that exist outside of any implementation of filter in a programming language to run on a computer. Everything in Section 5 is meant to be understood in terms of *"a filter written like X refers to the subset Y of the set of entries"*. Nothing in Section 5 should be saying *"filter feature X MUST be implemented via execution of code that does Y"*.

For exampe, lets say you and I are communicating about a scientific project. We aren't really discussing using an OPTiMaDe API for anything at this point, we are just discussing the project. In that conversation, you may say:  
> *Lets investigate pizeolectricity in all Ca, Ti, O compounds. I.e., in terms of an OPTiMaDe filter: `elements HAS ONLY "Ca", "Ti", "O"`*

and I may respond:

> *All the binaries you include have already been investigated for piezoelectricity by others, so we can limit this project to: `elements HAS ONLY "Ca", "Ti", "O"* AND nelements = "3"`*

This hypotetical conversation uses OPTiMaDe filters just as an abstract language, because it is a more precise way to express selections of entries than English is. But then, when is the "mandated  conversion" supposed to be happening? All that is done is the interpretation by humans of this language into a mental understanding of what type of compounds are referred to.

So, in your version of the rule: *the value of the string token "3" MUST be converted to an integer*, this cannot be understood to say that a conversion must take place in the sense of running computer code. It has to be a statement about the interpretation of the filter string. If so, is it not better to use a more precise phrasing? E.g., by saying: *"the vaue of the string token "3" MUST be the integer that would result from a conversion ....*

> the latter MUST be converted to an integer using conventions of stdlib's

Author: I think I now understand what you're saying. However, the following statement sounds very clumsy to me:

> * Given an integer property and a numeric or string token, the value of the latter MUST be the integer that would result from a conversion using the conventions ...

It reads as if a requirement for the *numeric or string token* to actually be the *integer that would result from a conversion*. Does the following sound better?

> * Given an integer property and a numeric or string token, the comparison MUST be performed between the property and the integer that would result from a conversion using the conventions ...

> the latter MUST be converted to an integer using conventions of stdlib's

Reviewer: Your way of rewriting it to refer to the "comparison" is a much better idea. But, I am unsure about the verb 'performed', since it also refers to an action, rather than an interpretation . So, maybe:
> * Given an integer property and a numeric or string token, the comparison MUST be interpreted as between the property and the integer that would result from a conversion using the conventions ...

But this also starts to become a bit long? Can it be reduced as follows?:

> * In a comparison with an integer property, a numeric or string token represents the integer value that would result from a conversion using the conventions....

> the latter MUST be converted to an integer using conventions of stdlib's

Author: Your suggested reduction reads well. I have rewritten all rules in this manner.

`atoi`.

* Given a float property and a numeric or string token, the value of

> the latter MUST be converted to a float using conventions of stdlib's

Author: Same here.

`atof`.

> * No conversion is needed for a string property and a numeric or string

Reviewer: Does this make it clear what the comparison semantics are for a string property and a "non-converted numeric token"? 

On the other hand, I don't think the string vs. string case needs to be mentioned.

So, perhaps?:
```
* Given a string property and a numeric token, 
  the string value of the latter is the verbatim sequence of
  characters making up that token.
```

Author: Changed to
```
* Given a string property and a numeric token, the string value (verbatim
sequence of characters) of the latter MUST be used.
```
Is this OK?

Reviewer: Ok.

token.

* If a comparison is provided between only constants of incompatible types,

> e.g., `5 < "13"`, the implementation MUST respond with an error. The same

Reviewer: ```suggestion
e.g., `5 < "13"`, the implementation MUST respond with error `501 Not Implemented`. The same
```

applies for comparisons of two properties, e.g. `nelements > chemical_formula_hill`.

* Given a timestamp property and a string token, the value of the latter

> MUST be parsed according to [RFC 3339 Internet Date/Time Format](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3339#section-5.6).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MUST be the timestamp that would result from parsing the string according to [RFC 3339 Internet Date/Time Format](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3339#section-5.6).
```

* Comparison of a timestamp property and a numeric token MUST be

> reported as an error.

Reviewer: `` the implementation MUST respond with error `501 Not implemented`. ``

Author: Good catch, fixed.

the database provider decides their types. In the syntactic
constructs that can accommodate values of more than one type, 
the semantics of the comparisons are controlled by the
types of the participating properties. The following conventions apply
for comparisons of values of different types:

* In a comparison with an integer property, a numeric or string token
represents the integer value that would result from a conversion using the
conventions of stdlib's `atoi`.

* In a comparison with a float property, a numeric or string token represents
the float value that would result from a conversion using the

> conventions of stdlib's `atof`.

Reviewer: This is a very good point.

For a number token, these oddities are indeed caught by the definition of of a number in the grammar. But, for a string token, the text right now says atof semantics apply.

So, e.g., according to the present text: `float_property = "007abc"` means the same as `float_property = 7.0`

This isn't great. What is a good strict way to say "normal string to float conversion with no extravagant features"?

> conventions of stdlib's `atof`.

Reviewer 2: >  What is a good strict way to say "normal string to float conversion with no extravagant features"?

Not sure... I didn't find something useful with a quick search. Are we "allowed" to mention in some sense "the way python would do it"? Or it's too specific? Or maybe we can just say something like "as atof would do, but only if the string matches our regexp for numbers that is written in the grammar?"

> conventions of stdlib's `atof`.

Reviewer: You mention the regex, but, that just reflects the *Number* token definition... Can't we just reference that in some way?

*In a comparison with a float property, a string token represents the value that would result from re-interpreting the string (the characters between the quotes) as a number token.*

This now excludes the previous part about comparisons of float with a number token, but, that one doesn't fall under 'type mismatch' anyway...

> conventions of stdlib's `atof`.

Reviewer 2: Sounds ok, but maybe mention explicitly "according to the rules of section 5.1" or something similar

> conventions of stdlib's `atof`.

Reviewer 2: The question now is: if below we return an error if we do string_property > 3.0, shouldn't we also here return an error if we do float_property > "2.0"?

> conventions of stdlib's `atof`.

Author: > Are we "allowed" to mention in some sense "the way python would do it"?

[Python3 float() conventions](https://docs.python.org/3/library/functions.html#float) allows `inf` and `nan`, so we'd still need to limit the representations.

We may keep the `atoi` and `atof`, but explicitly limit interpreted strings to ones corresponding to our number token syntax, throwing errors otherwise. What do you think?

> conventions of stdlib's `atof`.

Reviewer: I'm all for saying that all type mismatches are errors for now. And then we can take this discussion when more participants are present.

> conventions of stdlib's `atof`.

Reviewer 3: I think both `string_property > 3.0` and `float_property > "2.0"` should be flagged as errors at the current stage, we are on a safe side. Expansions are always possible later if needed.

But then, it is a client who formulates the query and does all the arithmetic to arrive at a single number for a comparison with a property; so for sure the client must know both the type of the numbers it is dealing with, and the type of the property it is searching for?

* In a comparison with a string property, a numeric token represents its

> string value (verbatim sequence of characters comprising its token).

Reviewer: OPTiMaDe properties have separate *integer* and *float* types; but, the filter language only has one unified *'Number'* token type that covers any type of numeric input `1`, `0.5`, `5E-1`, `50E-2`, etc. 

The above text is meant to say that if the filter contains a comparison between a string property and a numeric token (does not matter if it corresponds to a float or integer), then the 'conversion' into a string is done by taking the exact verbatim sequence of characters that was interpreted as a number token, e.g., `1`, `0.5`, `5E-1`, `50E-2`, etc. and instead of interpreting it as a number (float or integer), interpret it as a string.

Is this not the only sensible interpretation of the filter `text_property = 5E-1`? 

(Alternatively we could say "MUST return an error", if we think that is better.)

> string value (verbatim sequence of characters comprising its token).

Reviewer 2: Ok, maybe it wasn't too clear to me. Maybe one could say something like "verbatim sequence of characters of its token as written in the query string" instead of "verbatim sequence of characters comprising its token"? Or something like that?

I have the feeling I'd prefer a MUST return an error, but I think it's better to leave this specified in a single place later (and now anyway it's up to the implementor - I wouldn't make a special case here to always return an error.

> string value (verbatim sequence of characters comprising its token).

Reviewer: Note that we have the same type of "MUST return an error" in this section for, e.g., timestamp vs number token, so I think it would be OK to write out right here for the case of string property vs number token.

> string value (verbatim sequence of characters comprising its token).

Reviewer 2: Good point. Then, I think it's better to say MUST return an error at this stage, I think - if we do so, we know implementations will complain and clients will need to be careful about types and putting quotes where appropriate. If in the future we realise we need to relax this rule, we can always do it, and compliant clients will not notice anyway.

> string value (verbatim sequence of characters comprising its token).

Author: Sorry for late response.

> Maybe one could say something like "verbatim sequence of characters of its token as written in the query string" instead of "verbatim sequence of characters comprising its token"? Or something like that?

I am a bit reluctant to overload this definition. Addition of "as written in the query string" to me raises additional question whether URL-escaped or URL-unescaped query string is meant here.

> I have the feeling I'd prefer a MUST return an error

@giovannipizzi am I right to assume that you're talking about the comparison of string property and a float? Maybe a strict approach to all comparisons would be a good decision for the minimal API.

> Note that we have the same type of "MUST return an error" in this section for, e.g., timestamp vs number token

Should we replace this with "Comparison of timestamp property and a numeric token MUST NOT be carried out"? The requirement later insists that "The implementation MUST either make a conversion or respond with an error", so there is no need in repeating it.

> string value (verbatim sequence of characters comprising its token).

Reviewer: @giovannipizzi, @merkys I agree that saying that all "type mismatch" being errors would be the best solution for now, and then we can return to this discussion later. 

@merkys Any formulation that is clear is fine, and I think the change above would rather majorly change these paragraph.
